# Scraps from writing. Perhaps useful for the Kappa

# INDEX
# 
# Central state weakness/collapse interaction  
# Habituation/internalisation dependent on continuation?

# Central state weakness/collapse interaction
\subsubsection{Central State Weakness/Collapse}

When modern states `collapse' or in another sense achieve `failed state' status,
it creates a (series of) power vacuums and room/need for other actors to fill
the various roles usually filled by the state. At the regional level one can
imagine a handful of actors capable of filling this vacuum (of power and
service provision), one of which is pre-colonial state. Other candidates could
be active rebel groups, religious organizations and ethnic groups (not tied to
pre-colonial states). I would argue that pre-colonial states and active rebel
groups have distinct advantages above the others. Prime mover advantage and
capacity to monopolise violence on part of rebel groups, and legitimacy and
organizational benefits on the part of pre-colonial states.

The dynamics of this lie in how state collapse unfolds and `evolves'. Although I
am not sure if I will be able to test or properly examine this process I will
nevertheless sketch out how I imagine it (typically) unfolds.

Democratic collapse, succession/reform crises, state predation and/or civil war
are usually on the path toward state failure\citep{Goldstone_2008}. Once a state
has failed, lost its legitimacy and effectiveness \citep{Goldstone_2008}, other
actors will attempt to fill the void. This happens at all levels of government I
imagine, but most visibly at the country (repeated coups, attempts to overthrow
the government) and regional level (various forms of regional self governance).
I will focus on pre-colonial states reemerging as a basis of regional self
governance  (RSG) and the dynamics of it. If or when a pre-colonial state,
through either ethnic group, formal institutions or less formal networks, begins
to engage in RSG it sets out on a path that will at some point clash with the
interests of the central government. Because of its position as a pre-colonial
\textit{state} it is inevitably a challenge to the integrity of the state as a
whole. This creates a potential for further conflict, along new lines, in often
war torn countries. 

A different aspect of pre-colonial states engaging in RSG is that they can
create pockets of relatively functioning government within otherwise failed
states. I believe this can at least be tentatively explored on few case-by-case
basis using the data I have available. Do areas of high state presence (see data
section) outside the capital, experience a drop in combat events after engaging
in RSG. 

The example I primarily had in mind is  Puntland in Somaila, which corresponds
to the pre-colonial state of the Majarteen sultanate, has engaged in RSG as an
autonomous state within Somailas federal system. In terms of both peace and
prosperity the region has fared better than the rest of Somalia. Unlike
Somaliland the state is not seeking full independence. However, they do have
their own military forcer and tensions could rise if the central government were
to attempt further integration.

Other potential cases in Africa (see data) include Chad, Nigeria, DRC,
Sudan/Darfur and Lebanon.

Consider the illustrative case of the Russian federal state of Tatarstan. The
Tatar Khanate of Kazan was conquered by Ivan the Terrible in 1552 and
incorporated into the Russian empire as Kazan province by Peter the Great in
1708 \citep{Sharifzhanov_2007}. Despite Russification policies until the reign
of Cathrine II the Great (1762-96), when the Russian Empire collapsed following
the February revolution of 1917 Tatar nationalist seized the moment and declared
the creation Idel-Ural state \citep{Devlet_1993}. The nascent state laid claim
to boundaries closely resembling those of the old Khanate \citep{Hartley2020},
but the Bolsheviks and the Red Army were able to thwart the secession after a
month \citep{Hartley2020}. While the Tatars of Kazan no doubt were able to
retained their dreams of independence in large part to the ethnic and religious
differences between themselves and their rulers, it is striking that the
proposed borders follow those of the old Khanate and not of settlement patterns
of the Tatar ethnic group who were spread over a larger territory as part of the
Russification policy of the Tsars. Part of the movements goals was also the also
to allow Tatars émigré populations to return to their homeland
\citep{Devlet_1993}. When in turn the Soviet Union began to open up and collapse
in 1990-1991, the space once again opened up for the Tatars to reassert their
sovereignty. Following the example of Moscow and Russia the Tatar Autonomous
Soviet Socialist Republic declared itself a sovereign republic within the USSR,
which it attained in a declaration adopted by the Supreme Soviet. Thus on 12
June 1991 Russia acquired two presidents, Boris Yeltsin and Mintimir Sheymiev
\citep{Sharifzhanov_2007}. A referendum was set for 21 March 1992 on the
question of Tatarstan's independence. Authorities in Moscow tried to prevent
the referendum through the Constitutional Court of Russia and televised appeal
by Yeltsin to boycott the referendum, warning that an affirmative response
``would possibly lead to bloodshed." \citep{Sharifzhanov_2007}.  Nevertheless,
the referendum went ahead in the presence of international observers and boasted
a turnout 82 percent of which 61.4 percent voted for independence
\citep{Devlet_1993}. Following the referendum a new constitution was drafted
confirming Tatarstan's sovereignty. ``The Republic of Tatarstan shall be a
sovereign state, a subject of international law, associated to the Russian
Federation - Russia - on the basis of the Treaty on Mutual Delegation of Powers
and Subjects under Jurisdiction." \citet{Sharifzhanov_2007}. Unlike Chechen
leaders the Tatar leaders did not threaten use violent resistance to secede from
Russia, and through negotiations with the Yeltsin government they were able to
carve out a unique position of autonomy within the Russian Federation in 1994.
The different positions on the use of violence between the Chechens and Tatars
I believe is due to the feasibility of armed resistance to even a greatly
weakened Russian state based on geographic conditions. Chechnya is on the very
edge of the Russian periphery and is a mountainous country. Tatarstan on the
other hand lies relatively close to Moscow, and its steppe terrain lends an
advantage to modern national armies. In the words of the Chairman of the
Tatarstan parliament: ``We take a completely \textit{realistic} view of the
state of affairs: full independence is too abstract and unnecessary a concept
whereas Tatarstan and Russia are linked by inseparable bonds."
\citep{Sharifzhanov_2007}(emphasis added). At the same time parallels were still
drawn all the way back to the Kazan Khanate. During a speech at the first World
Congress of Tatars the Tatarstan president Mintimir Sheymiev declared that:

\textit{The history of the Tatars nation is very difficult and tragic. The
Tatars lost their Bulgar state, but found a respectable place for themselves
within the Golden Horde. After its collapse they created the khanates of Kazan
[...] the restoration of statehood was an idea ever present in Tatar history.}
(cited in \citet{mustafin1995pervyi}, 113).

H2.1: Grid cells with higher state presence experience higher levels of civil
conflict following state collapse. 

Currently not testing this hypothesis for a lack of a good measure of state
collapse. Of course, this is not insurmountable, but I am not sure if it
falls outside the scope of this paper. Perhaps this is best proxied by resent
decolonisation/independence in the African context, which is somewhat testable
by running the models of sub-samples of years. Specifically compare 1946-69 (or
so) to other subsets of years. Perhaps split by decades. This would of course
be an instance of state weakness more than collapse (unless you count it as the
collapse of the colonial regime, in which case it is apt).

# Habituation/internalisation dependent on continuation?

Habitation/internalisation predicts lower levels of violence in higher state
presence areas \textit{contingent} on \textit{continuation} of state presence,
as this is quickly `unlearned'. In Africa this is almost exclusively central
(historical) Ethiopia and perhaps parts of South Africa depending on the
definition of continuation. However, a global sample would be interesting and
perhaps contribute new insights to the argument that colonialism caused much of
the woes and conflicts in the non-western world.

# Intro stuff
A fact that is rarely discussed, is that for the most part what the Europeans
conquered during the colonization of Africa, were pre-existing states\footnote{An
extended discussion of what kind of statehood existed in pre-colonial Africa
will follow below.}, with their own armies, dynasties and sometimes hundreds of
years of history. Likewise, numerous studies have examined how colonial
experiences have shaped post independence levels of conflict
\citep{achankeng2013conflict, Blanton_2001, carton2000blood, Cohen_2014,
Nunn2008, Wucherpfennig2016}. 

In many countries in Africa there is at least some
continuity of rule and institutions running from a pre-colonial state, through
colonial administration, to the post-independence state. In these cases the state is
able to draw upon old institutions and governance capacity. On the other hand,
there are areas with long histories of independent statehood that find
themselves ruled from far away capitals, whose populations prior to the colonial
era had little to no contact. In these cases, local elite networks with the
capacity to mobilize for conflict often find their interests at odds with the
central state's.
