APSR Feedback Takeaways
=======================

The data are seemingly the only redeeming factor of this paper...yay?

1) More focus in theory section on (cumulative) *intensity* of violence. There
is a good source in the feedback on how intense conflict requires intensive
organization. **Or**, explain better (in the theory) that I am talking about
heightening the general conflict level. As captured by a count of fatalities
*over time*.

2) More emphasis on **prior statehood -> more robust rebel movements -> Longer
and more intense conflicts** and **divided legacies -> lack of legitimacy ->
poor institutions -> Longer and more intense conflicts**

3) Explain (better) why controls for "the obvious [country level]Â factors who
normally associate with civil wars" cannot be used.

~~4) Control for local rather country level colonizer.

5) Discussion on generalizability? America is different because of smallpox.
Europe and some parts of Asia are different because they have the resources to
pay off or channel trouble-making groups into 

6) Cartographers were perhaps more likely to get borders more wrong for larger
states than for smaller states, i.e. the variance of the error measure is
correlated with ... Not sure how this affects anything.

However, error measurements are definitely more likely in cells where few
cartographers have drawn states. Either because these areas were peripheral to
some state (they were difficult to determine), or because the level of
statehood/social organization of the local political entity was so low that few
or no cartographers elected to draw its borders. In more mathematical terms: the
measurement error is correlated with the true independent/explanatory variable x
(often denoted x*), and the classical errors-in-variables (CEV) assumption does
not hold. But, what does this mean?

7) Explain which countries are included in the North Africa dummy. And make sure
they make sense, if not change it. It should probably be just Egypt, Libya,
Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco. I could consider adding Darfur and Ethiopia to
make a more general "over estimated" dummy.

8) Write better... Or find co-author? Charles? Help me re-write it and get
co-authorship?

9) Add fixed effects to appendix even though it does not make sense.

10) Add the sensitivity plot to appendix and make reference to it.

11) Binned scatter plot to visualize results?

12) Add the stupid regression equation for the stupid economists.

13) Additional controls: Alsan's tsetse variable. Nunn and Puga's ruggedness
variable. Sach's malaria index.

14) Explain queen-pattern better.

15) Deal with potential spatial correlation in the error term. Conley standard
errors or an alternative.

16) Cluster standard errors on country, even though it is a terrible idea
(guarantied post-treatment bias).

17) What did I do with alternative measure?

18) Create weighted by year PCSP variable.

19) ACLED data, did not converge?

20) New title?
